---
title: Eph4-25-32
template: lesson.jade
---


**Ephesians 4:25-32 5**

Ephesians 4:25-32 (W. Doud notes)

Ephesians 4:25

**Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor, for we are members one of another.**

This section of Ephesians, from 4:25 to 5:2, directs us to the very
practical results of our putting on the “new man” of verse 24. The word
“wherefore” indicates that the following characteristics of the
Christian life are a direct result of the development of a new Christian
character.

This is where the rubber meets the road. The Christian life demands a
new character, a new outlook, and a willingness both to “abide in
Christ” and to “grow in Christ.” Here are the positive qualities or
actions that must be found in the Christian life.

We are to “put away lying” and “speak truth”.

**Zech. 8:16 ’These are the things which you should do: speak the truth
to one another; judge with truth and judgment for peace in your gates.**

Falsehood is put away with the old man. Truth, and truthfulness, comes
in with edification.

**“we are members one of another”**

When Christians try to deceive one another, they break the bonds of
royal family, love, and fellowship. We belong together as members of one
body, so we must be completely honest and open with one another.

Chrysostom: “If the eye sees a serpent, does it deceive the foot? If the
tongue tastes what is bitter, does it deceive the stomach?”

Foulkes: “Lying is a great hindrance to the proper functioning of the
body. When members are open and truthful, the body will work in harmony
and therefore efficiently. Without openness and truth, there can only be
disunity, disorder, and trouble.”

In general, growth in Christ is the antidote for verbal sins.

Topic: SINS OF THE TONGUE

Ephesians 4:26

**Be angry and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.**

OR, “Although you may have become angry, stop sinning.”

This verse is a quotation of Psalm 4:4.

There is righteous anger, such as we see in the Lord Himself (Mark 3:5;
John 2:13-17); but His anger never led to sin because His emotions were
always perfectly controlled by the Holy Spirit.

Foulkes: “A Christian must be sure that any anger is that of righteous
indignation and not just an expression of personal provocation or
wounded pride. It must have no sinful motives nor be allowed to lead to
sin in any way.”

Christians can have victory over the sin of anger! The Bible talks about
anger and answers questions like the following:

What’s the difference between sinful anger and righteous indignation?

Does God get angry?

What causes me to get angry, and what can I do about it?

How can I have victory over the sin of anger?

If you haven’t recently studied what the Bible says about ANGER, it’s
important that you do so now. The topic accompanies this lesson.

Topic: ANGER

**“let not the sun go down upon your wrath”**

“Wrath” is PARORGISMOS, “provocation”, which refers to the personal
resentment that anger, even righteous anger, can become when it is
harbored and brooded over in men’s hearts, especially when the heart is
overwhelmed with temptations to malice and bitterness. Passionate
feelings against people are not to be kept long lest they break down the
love between brethren.

The teaching of verses 31 and 32 is also very important here. Those
verses show that the means for putting away bitterness and malice is
“forgiveness”. The grace believer is a forgiving person. Realizing that
the Lord has forgive us, even when we were His enemies, we are motivated
to put away our self righteousness, or even our genuine rights, in order
to forgive others and “put away wrath”.

Even unbelievers are not strangers to this concept of achieving
immediate reconciliation with others in times of strife. Plutarch says
of the Pythagoreans: “.. if betrayed into angry reviling (they) made it
their rule to shake hands before sunset.”

**Psalm 4:4, “Tremble, and do not sin; Meditate in your heart upon your
bed, and be still. Selah.”**

Ephesians 4:27

**Neither give place to the devil.**

**“Place”** = “opportunity”. Bishop Moule says that anger “gives Satan a
half open door”, an opportunity for fostering the spirit of pride or
hatred.

Foulkes: “Sudden instinctive indignation against injustice or wrong,
good in itself, if retained and nursed as a grievance, will let the
devil lead his victim on to unkind thoughts, words and actions, and so
work havoc with personal relationships.”

Satan is to be resisted. James 4:7. He is to be given no place in the
believer’s life.

Ephesians 4:28

**Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labor, working
with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him
that has need.**

There must be no more common pilfering, but honest work instead.

Dishonesty was a way of life for many in ancient times, just as it is
for many people today. Whenever discipline or personal integrity is even
slightly relaxed, honesty and productivity slip a lot. Most employees
are in a position to steal something: pencils, computer time, petty
cash, working time.

The honest Christian laborer stands out in a society like this. Honesty
and good character are two of the most important aspects of the
Christian’s testimony. In any witnessing situation, these traits are
necessary before any verbal testimony can be successful. Lev 19:35,36;
Deut 25:13-16

**Prov 11:1 “A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just
weight is his delight.”**

See also Prov. 16:11; 20:10; Micah 6:9-14.

**Rom 12:17 “Recompense no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in
the sight of all men.”**

READ 2 Cor 8:20-24

**1 Thess 4:11,12 “That ye study to be quiet, and to do your own
business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you; that ye
may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have
lack of nothing.”**

Note carefully Titus 2:9,10

Urge bondslaves to be subject to their own masters in everything, to be
well-pleasing, not argumentative, NOT PILFERING, but showing all good
faith that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in every
respect.

The objective of this Christian life is to ADORN, to DECORATE the
doctrine of the Savior! What a precious privilege and responsibility!

To ADORN means “to arrange; to set in order; to decorate; to embellish;
to prepare; to trim; to put in readiness; to honor; to dignify”

**Matt. 23:29 “Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because
you build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish (kosmew) the sepulchres
of the righteous…”**

**Luke 21:5 “And as some spoke of the temple, how it was adorned
(kosmew) with goodly stones and gifts,”**

**1 Tim 2:9 “…women adorn (kosmew) themselves in modest apparel…” The
adorning of the heart is to be given priority.**

**Rev. 21:2,19 “And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And
the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished (kosmew) with all
manner of precious stones.”**

One of the main goals of God’s plan is that every Christian “adorn” or
“decorate” the doctrine of the Lord. Honesty in everyday life is a very
important part of this.

Ephesians 4:29

**Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which
is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearers.**

Note just ahead in Ephesians 5:3,4, “But do not let immorality or any
impurity or greed even be named among you, as is proper among saints;
and {there must be no} filthiness and silly talk, or coarse jesting,
which are not fitting, but rather giving of thanks.”

The word “corrupt” is SOPROS, “rotten”, therefore “worthless”. Like bad
fruit, such speech spreads rottenness and leads others to think on the
worthless. This is to be replaced with “that which is good”.

**Proverbs 15:23, A man has joy in an apt answer, And how delightful is
a timely word!**

Foulkes: “The test of a man’s use of money is: ‘What am I giving to
those in need?’ The test of his conversation is not just ‘Am I keeping
my words true and pure?’ but ‘Are my words being used to minister grace
unto the hearers?’”

The speech of the Christian is to be characterized by grace.

**Col. 3:16,17, “Let the word of Christ richly dwell within you, with
all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns and
spiritual songs, singing with. And whatever you do in word or deed, do
all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks through Him to God the
Father.”**

**Col. 4:5,6, “Conduct yourselves with wisdom toward outsiders, making
the most of the opportunity. Let your speech always be with grace,
seasoned, as it were, with salt, so that you may know how you should
respond to each person.”**

Ephesians 4:30

**And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are sealed unto the
day of redemption.**

All sin is a cause of personal sorrow to God. We are called to “walk
worthy of the vocation with which you are called”, to walk in fellowship
with the Lord. And the Holy Spirit occupies the Christian and is the
source, the bond, of the spiritual fellowship with have with God. He is
our teacher and our comforter. Sin grieves the Holy Spirit and is the
cause for the loss of fellowship, the loss of filling, the loss of the
controlling ministry of the Spirit.

The Spirit’s presence is also a seal of assurance of the life and
inheritance that we possess now and will possess fully in the end. The
very thought of this should encourage us to keep ourselves pure.

**1 John 3:2-6, "Beloved, now we are children of God, and it has not
appeared as yet what we shall be. We know that, when He appears, we
shall be like Him, because we shall see Him just as He is.**

**"And everyone who has this hope {fixed} on Him purifies himself, just
as He is pure.**

**"Everyone who practices sin also practices lawlessness; and sin is
lawlessness.**

**"And you know that He appeared in order to take away sins; and in Him
there is no sin.**

**“No one who abides in Him sins; no one who sins has seen Him or knows
Him.”**

But we do sin! And we do grieve the Spirit! So remember that Jesus
Christ is our Advocate with the Father. And remember that there is open
to us a method of being cleansed from the corruption and defilement of
the sin we commit - by means of the cleansing which follows confession.

**1 John 1:9, “If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”**

**Prov. 1:23, “Turn at my reproof, Behold, I will pour out my spirit on
you; I will make my words known to you.”**

So there is a restoration to fellowship with the Spirit, a means of
continuing to be occupied with Christ, through acknowledging God’s
sovereignty and our sin.

Ephesians 4:31

**Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice:**

Here is even more reference to sins of the tongue and of mental
attitude, so that they can be set over against the way that we have
learned in Christ. Six things are named here that are decisively to be
put away.

**“Bitterness”** is PIKRIA (cf. the English “picric acid”). Aristotle
spoke of this as “the resentful spirit which refuses reconciliation.”
The Apostle Paul says that all of this must go, every trace of such
sharpness of spirit, of such temper.

The “wrath” and “anger” here are those which spring up from passion and
temper because of personal resentment or provocation. The only Christian
rule about these is total abstinence!

Then follows “clamor”, KRAUGEI, which is “the loud self-assertion of the
angry man, who will make everyone else hear his grievance.”

**“Evil speaking”** is BLASPHEMIA, “slander; blasphemy”. This word is
commonly used for speaking against God, but it is also often used for
slanderous or abusive speaking against one’s fellow men.

Finally, Paul adds “all malice”, or “bad feeling of every kind”, thus
demanding the complete exclusion from the Christian’s life of every
thought that leads a person to speak or do evil against some else
(Foulkes).

Ephesians 4:32

**And be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.**

The parallel passage in Col. 3:12 says, “Put on therefore, as God’s
elect, holy and beloved, a heart of compassion, kindness, humility,
meekness, longsuffering.”

If, after all, God has forgiven us of the most heinous sins, having
reconciled us even while we were His enemies (Romans 5), how much more
ought we to have gracious regards for other people, and act as conduits
of God’s grace to them.

A forgiving spirit is one of the most obvious and telling character
traits in a growing Christian. The lack of a forgiving spirit is the
mark of the novice Christian.

The word “forgive” is a Grace word, in the English as well as in the
Greek. An early meaning in English was “to give or to grant”. Then,
“forgive” came to mean “to remit a debt; to give up resentment or claim
for requital; to pardon an offense.”

All of us are debtors to others, to society as a whole. And we often
feel that people owe us many things in our human relationships. We feel
we are owed courtesy and consideration. Sometimes we think that we are
owed reward or status or promotion in some enterprise, or on the job. We
are certainly owed fair treatment, justice, restitution and many other
things.

But, many people in America are spiritually, ethically, and morally
bankrupt. They simply cannot pay society what they owe! They are
thoughtless, selfish, ungracious. What should a Christian do about all
of the debts owed to him. Answer: forgive them, as Christ forgave you.

A Christian who practices Grace thinking (divine viewpoint) will become
a forgiving person. To forgive means “to give up a claim; to cease
bearing resentment”.

The rich man in Luke 7 was able to forgive the two debtors because he
was prosperous. He gave to them out of his prosperity. A person can only
give to others out of what God has already provided in the way of
prosperity. In terms of money, the principle is “Let him that stole,
steal no more; rather, let him labor, doing with his hands the thing
that is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.”

As a growing Christian, you have many other kinds of prosperity, by the
Grace of God. You have intellectual prosperity (divine viewpoint). You
have spiritual prosperity (peace with God). You have emotional
prosperity (relaxed mental attitude). You have financial prosperity
(mastery of details of life). You have social prosperity (stable
marriage, stable family life, etc.).

Wherever in your life you find that someone else owes you something, you
have the wherewithal to forgive him! God has forgiven all of us who are
absolutely without resources of our own. And He is not expecting or
demanding some kind of payment in return for His Grace gifts. And we are
to be channels of Grace to the world. “Out of your innermost being shall
flow rivers of living water.”

