---
title: "Levitical Sacrifices and Offerings"
pdf: "leviticalsacrifices.pdf"
description: "Levitical Sacrifices and Offerings -  Descriptions and Christian typology of the Levitical sacrifices and offerings; isagogical support to study of New Testament epistles."
tableOfContents: yes
template: topic.jade
---

##### Introduction

There are several terms used in the Bible to describe the act of
sacrifice. The first has to do with something given or offered to God,
and is used particular with regard to bloodless offerings. Examples are
the use of the word “gift” in Gen. 33:13–21; 43:11, etc.; the word
“tribute” in 2 Sam. 8:2,6; 1 Kings 5:1 and 2 Kings 17:4; and the word
“offering” in 1 Chron. 16:29 and Isa. 1:13.

The other type is the bloody sacrifice, in which the shedding of blood
is the main idea, as opposed to the whole burnt offering which is
completely burned. The Greek word θυσια (**thusia**) is used for both the
animal in the sacrifice and for the act of burning, whether literal or
figurative. In the New Testament, a sacrifice (or offering) is
ὁλοκαυτομα (**holokautoma**), which means "wholly consumed (Latin
*holocaustum*). See Acts 21:26; 24:17; Eph. 5:2; Heb. 10:5; Mark 12:33;
Heb. 10:6,8.

Cain and Abel offered sacrifices to God (Gen. 4:3,4). Cain’s offering
was “of the fruit of the ground,” and Abel “of the firstlings of his
flock and the fat thereof”. Then, Noah expressed his thanks for
deliverance from the flood by offering burnt sacrifices on an altar he
had constructed. The patriarchs consistently built altars and offered
sacrifices, particularly in places where God had revealed Himself to
them. As Edersheim has put it, in his book The Temple, “Indeed, to
sacrifice seems as natural to man as to pray; the one indicates what he
feels about himself, the other what he feels about God. The one means a
felt need of propitiation, the other a felt sense of dependence.”

In the Pentateuch, the fundamental idea of sacrifice is that of
substitution; and under the Mosaic law the offering of sacrifice was a
covenant duty, with the materials of the offering and the ceremonies
described in minute detail. The ground on which the legal offering of
sacrifices is based is the commandment, “None shall appear before me
empty” (Exo. 23:15), or “Appear not empty before the face of Jehovah”.
That is to say, “Every man shall give as he is able, according to the
blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee” (Deut. 16:16,17).

No religious act in the Old Testament was complete unless accompanied
with sacrifice; the system was designed by God with the intention of
awakening a consciousness of sin and uncleanness and of showing the
possibility of obtaining the forgiveness of sin and becoming righteous
before God.

The presenting to God a gift of a portion of the results of one’s labor
implied a surrender of the person to God. But man is unholy and sinful,
and is thus unable to surrender himself to the holy God. Therefore,
laying the hand upon the head of the animal was a symbol of transferring
to the victim of the sacrifice the sinfulness of the offeror. The animal
thus took the place of the offeror and became his substitute; and the
killing of the animal pointed out the necessity of death of the man
whose sin alienates him from God.

However, sacrifices, as such, had no power in themselves to heal the
rupture between God and man, because an animal cannot make an adequate
satisfaction for the sin and guilt of man. When Jesus Christ, the
sinless and righteous God-man, voluntarily offered Himself on the Cross,
He fulfilled the Law of sacrifices and ordinances; and the typical
meaning of each sacrifice and offering was brought out in full.

The rest of this study is devoted to a description of the Mosaic
sacrifices and offerings, including a study of the materials used in
each offering, the ceremony employed in making the sacrifice, and a
brief discussion of the spiritual meaning, the typology, of each.

##### The Classes of Levitical Sacrifices

There were two classes of sacrifice in Old Testament times.

The first class was those sacrifices offered to enable a person to enter
into communion (fellowship) with God. These are known as propitiatory
offerings and included the sin and trespass offerings.

The second class was intended to be offerings made by believers in
fellowship; and these included the burnt offerings, peace offerings,
thank offerings, votive offerings, freewill offerings, and meal and
drink offerings.

Keep in mind that when several sacrifices were offered on the same
occasion, the propitiatory offerings were offered first, followed by the
burnt offerings, and then the peace offering. The meal and drink
offerings were offered with the burnt offerings, or by themselves.

##### Materials Used in the Sacrifices

With respect to the materials used in the sacrifices, they were divided
into two classes: the blood sacrifices, in which an animal was killed,
and the bloodless offerings, the “meal” (vegetable and mineral) and
drink offerings.

Animals offered included oxen, sheep, goats, and turtledoves or young
pigeons. The pigeons were used by people who could not afford the more
expensive animals (Lev. 5:7; 12:8) and to serve as lesser sin offerings.
Both male and female cattle could be offered (Lev. 3:1-6), but among the
sheep and goats special prominence was given to the male animal (Num.
15:5 ff; 28:11 ff). The animal had to be at least eight days old (Lev.
22:27; Exo. 22:30), although sheep and goats were usually offered when a
year old (Exo. 29:38; Lev. 9:3), and oxen when they were three years
old. Any animal offered had to be free from any blemish (Lev. 22:20-24).

Vegetables offered were grain, olive oil, wine, salt, and incense, which
was partly vegetable and partly mineral. The grain was offered roasted
in the ear or as fine flour, to both of which incense and oil were added
(Lev. 2:1-15), or as unleavened bread or biscuits. The bread was either
baked in an oven, baked in a pan, or fried in oil; in each case the
flour was mixed with oil.

All of the animal and vegetable offerings had to be salted (Lev. 2:13;
Eze. 43:24; Mark 9:49). Neither leaven nor honey were allowed in any
offering made to God by fire (Lev. 2:13).

The animals and meat offerings selected for sacrifice were from the
ordinary food of the Hebrews, in order to express gratitude for
blessings bestowed and to pray for continuation of His goodness. As
these offerings were the fruit of their life and work, and presenting
them showed a consecration to God of their life with all its ability and
energy.

##### Method of Presentation of the Sacrifices

In animal sacrifices, the animal was brought to the door or the
tabernacle, near the altar. The person bringing the animal placed his
hand on the animal’s head, then killed it at the north side of the altar
(Lev. 1:4,5,11; 3:2,8; 6:25; 7:2). When the sacrifice was part of the
regular services on festive occasions or offered on behalf of the whole
people, the animals were slaughtered and cut up by the priests.

Once the animal was slain, the priest caught the blood in a vessel, and
depending on the nature of the sacrifice, sprinkled some of it either on
the side of the altar, on the horns of the Altar of Incense, or on the
Ark (Day of Atonement). The remainder of the blood was emptied at the
foot of the great altar. (Exo. 29:12; Lev. 4:17 ff)

The animal was then skinned and cut into pieces by the offeror (or
priest), and either entirely burnt on the altar or just the fat burnt on
the altar, with any remainder being burnt outside the camp. This
“burning” amounted to cooking the animal, and the animal was then eaten
by the priests, or by the priests along with the one who had brought the
animal.

If the sacrifice was a bird, the priest wrung off the bird’s head and
allowed the blood to flow on the side of the altar. He then threw the
viscera on the ash heap beside the altar, and the head and body were
burnt on the altar (Lev. 1:15).

If vegetable offerings were being made at the same time as burnt
offerings, part of the flour and oil, some of the ears of corn and the
cakes, along with the incense, were burned on the altar, the remainder
going to the priests, who were required to consume it in the court of
the tabernacle without leaven (Lev. 2:2ff; 6:9–11; 7:9ff; 10:12ff). If
the offering was a thank offering, one cake was presented as a wave
offering (see below) to God, and was given to the priest who spilled the
blood (Lev. 7:14), the remainder of the offering being eaten by those
who presented it.

##### The Sin Offering

The sin offering was first directly commanded in Lev. 4. “If a soul
shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord
concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall do against any
of them”, then that conduct would required a sin offering. The idea is
that some sins are unintentional, “in error”, and may have been
committed through ignorance, hurry, lack of consideration, or
carelessness, in other words, sins which came from human weakness, as
opposed to sins which are deliberately and knowingly done in rebellion
against God and His commandments. [The penalty for presumptuous sin was
to be cut off from among God’s people (Lev. 15:30).]

The effect of the sin offering was forgiveness of the sin and cleansing
from the pollution of sin (Lev. 4:20,26,31,35; 5:10; 12:8; 14:20;
16:19). Its presentation assumed that the offeror was conscious of sin;
and the laying on of the hands was understood to mean that the sin was
to be transferred to the animal (Lev. 4:4,14).

The soul was brought into fellowship within divine grace through the
pouring out of the blood of the sacrifice, analogous to the death of
Christ on the Cross. The burning of the fat on the altar was an offering
of a “sweet savor” to God, and was symbolical of the handing over to God
the better part of man, that which is capable of cleansing and renewal,
in order that it might be purified by the fire of God’s holiness and
love.

###### The Material of the Sin Offering

The animal to be offered was determined by the nature of the offense and
by the position, or rank, of the one making the offering.

A young bullock was offered for a sin of the whole congregation (Lev.
4:13), for a sin of the high priest (Lev. 4:3), for the high priest on
the Day of Atonement (Lev. 16:3), and for the consecration of priests
and Levites to their offices (Exo. 29:10,14,35; Num. 8:8).

A he-goat was offered on new moon and annual festivals (Num.
28:15,22,30; 29:5,11,16,19), at the dedication of the tabernacle (and
Temple) (Num. 7:16,22; Ezra 6:17, w/8:35), and for the sin of a prince
(Lev. 4:23).

A she-goat was offered for a sin by one of the common people (Lev.
4:28,32; 5:6).

A she-lamb of a year old was offered for the cleansing of a leper (Lev.
14:10,19) and when a Nazarite was released from his vow (Num. 6:14).

A pigeon or turtledove was used for purifying a woman after childbirth
(Lev. 12:6), for a man or woman who had protracted issues of blood (Lev.
15:14,29), and for a Nazarite who had been defiled by contact with a
dead body (Num. 6:10). A bird was also used as a substitute for a lamb
in the case of poverty, for an ordinary offense (Lev. 5:7).

###### Method of Presenting the Sin Offering

If the offering was a bullock offered on behalf of the high priest or of
the whole congregation, its blood was taken into the Holy Place and
sprinkled seven times toward the inner veil, then upon the horns of the
altar of incense. The remainder was poured at the foot of the altar of
burnt offering (Lev. 4:5ff). If the animal was a ram, a she-goat, or a
lamb, the blood was merely put on the horns of the altar of burnt
offering.

On the Day of Atonement, the high priests took the blood of the sin
offering made for himself (the bullock) into the Holy of Holies and
sprinkled it on the Mercy Seat of the Ark. He then returned to the altar
and took the blood of the goat offered for the sins of the congregation
into the Holy of Holies and sprinkled it in the same manner.

In all cases, the next step was to separate the fatty portions of the
animal and burn them on the altar (Lev. 4:8–35).

In those cases in which the blood was sprinkled either in the Holy Place
or in the Holy of Holies, the flesh, along with the skin, head, and all
other parts of the animal were carried outside the camp (later, outside
the city of Jerusalem) to a clean place where the ashes of sacrifice
were usually placed, there to be consumed by fire (Lev. 4:11ff; 6:23;
16:27). In the case of other sin offerings, the flesh was eaten by the
priests in the holy place (Lev. 6:26; Num. 18:9,10).

Any earthenware vessel from which the priests ate was broken; copper
vessels were scoured. Garments on which blood had fallen were washed
(Lev. 6:27,28).

###### Typology of the Sin Offering

The sin offering presents Christ atoning for the guilt of sin (Heb.
13:11,12). It shows Christ as actually burdened with the believer’s sin,
standing in the sinner’s place as his substitute. This offering tells of
the Lord’s death as presented in Isaiah 53, Psalm 22, and 1 Peter 2:24.
It carefully guards the holiness of Him who “was made sin for us.”

##### The Trespass Offering

The trespass offering was also a propitiatory offering, but it was made
for a special offense, while the sin offering was made for the person of
the offender. “In fact, the trespass offering may be regarded as
representing ransom for a special wrong, while the sin offering
symbolized general redemption” (Edersheim, *The Temple*, p. 100ff).

The trespass offering was a ram, which was valued by a priest according
to the shekel of the sanctuary (Lev. 5:15,18; 6:6; 19:21). In the case
of a leper or a Nazarite, this offering was a lamb. These offerings were
offered for the following offenses:

1. Trespass in ignorance against things of the Lord, that is, to
inadvertently take away from God that which belonged to Him, of
sacrifices, first fruits, tithes, etc. Compensation for the harm done
accompanied the sacrifice, with the gift of a fifth part of the value to
the priests.

2. Ignorant transgression of any definite prohibition of the law (Lev.
5:17).

3. Fraud, suppression of the truth, or perjury against a neighbor; with
compensation to the victim and an additional fifth part of any property
in question to the person wronged (Lev. 6:1ff).

4. Rape of a slave (Lev. 19:20–22)

5. At the purification of a leper (Lev. 14:12), and of a polluted
Nazarite (Num. 6:12).

In this offering, the skin of the animal and any meat offering went to
the officiating priest, except that portions that were mixed with oil or
were dry were divided among all the priests.

###### Typology of the Trespass Offering

This ritual shows Christ’s atoning for the damage caused by sin and has
in view the injury of the sin as opposed to the guilt of the sin. This
aspect of the trespass offering is seen in Psalm 51:4, “Against thee and
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that thou
mightest be justified when thou speakest and be clear when thou
judgest.”

## The Burnt Offering

The name for the burnt offering comes from the Hebrew word **holah**,
“ascending”, because, as the animal was wholly consumed in the fire
(with the exception of the skin), the smoke would rise toward heaven.
(The animals in other sacrifices were only partially consumed on the
altar.) The burnt offering symbolized the entire surrender to God of the
individual or congregation, God’s acceptance of that surrender, and
therefore the renewal and restoration of the individual. This offering
was not made to atone for sin, as were the other offerings.

This offering was supposed to reflect the inward volition of every true
Hebrew and so was required to be presented regularly on the following
occasions:

1. Every morning and evening (Exo. 29:38–42; Num. 28:3–8).

2. Each Sabbath day, double offerings (Num. 28:9,10).

3. At the new moon, the three great festivals, the Day of Atonement, and
Feast of Trumpets (Num. 28:11–29:39).

Special burnt offerings were required:

1. At the consecration of priests (Exo. 29:15; Lev. 8:18; 9:12).

2. At the purification of women (Lev. 12:6–8)

3. At the cleansing of lepers (Lev. 14:19).

4. For removal of other ceremonial uncleanness (Lev. 15:15,30).

5. On any accidental breach of the Nazarite vow, or at its conclusion
(Num. 6:11,14).

Freewill burnt offerings were made on any solemn occasion such as the
dedication of the tabernacle or the Temple (1 Kings 8:64).

The burnt offering was the only sacrifice that non-Israelites were
allowed to bring. The emperor Augustus had a daily burnt offering
brought for him of two lambs and a bullock; and this sacrifice was
regarded as indicating that the Jews recognized him as their ruler. At
the commencement of the Jewish war, the high priest Eleazar rejected
this offering, which was seen as rebellion against Rome.

###### Typology of the Burnt Offering

In this offering, the idea of sin is not conspicuous, and sets forth
Christ offering Himself without spot to God to perform God’s will with
joy; the offering is a sweet savor to God, so-called because it deals
with Christ in His own perfections and devotion to the Father’s will, as
opposed to the non-sweet savor offerings which show Christ carrying the
believer’s sin.

The sacrificial animals symbolize Christ in some aspect of His redeeming
character. The ox shows His patient endurance as Savior (1 Cor. 9:9,10;
Isa. 52:13–15; Phil. 2:5–8). The sheep or ram portrays Christ in His
unresisting facing of death (Isa. 53:7). The goat typifies a sinner,
and, when it is used for Christ, shows Him as the One who was “numbered
with the transgressors.” The turtledove or pigeon symbolizes mourning
innocence and portrays poverty. It shows forth Him who became poor that
we might become rich. (Isa. 38:14; Heb. 7:26; Lev. 5:7; 2 Cor. 8:9;
Phil. 2:6–8).

##### The Peace Offering

The peace offering was another sacrifice offered by a believer in
fellowship with God. It is divided into three kinds of offering: (1) the
thank offering, or sacrifice of thanks (Lev. 7:12; 22:29); (2) the
votive offering, or sacrifice which accompanied the taking of a vow
(Num. 6:14; 15:3,8); and (3) the freewill offering. The peace offering
always followed any other sacrifices that were taking place.

Public peace offerings were customary on festive occasions, the election
of kings, and whenever some important enterprise had been successful
(Exo. 24:5; 2 Sam. 6:17ff; 1 Kings 8:63; 1 Sam. 11:15; Deut. 27:7; Josh.
8:31).

These offerings were specifically prescribed for the Feast of Pentecost
(Lev. 23:19). Festivals were observed with peace offerings; and Solomon
ordered a sacrificial festival of burnt and peace offerings to be held
three times a year (1 Kings 9:25).

The peace offerings speak of the state of grace of the believer in
fellowship with God, and they took place mainly in connection with
feasts commemorating God. They helped to establish people more firmly in
their walk with Jehovah and to be more mindful of God when enjoying
prosperity and mercies. The peace offering also enabled the Hebrew to be
reminded of God’s nearness and protection whenever adversity threatened
to take his mind off the Lord.

The thank offering was offered in times of personal or national
prosperity or success, at any time, in fact, when the believer felt
thankful to God for what He had bestowed.

The freewill offering seems to have been centered in the desire to thank
God for the enjoyment of His provision and to make supplication for its
continuance.

The animals in the peace offerings were either unblemished oxen or
smaller cattle of either sex (Lev. 3:1,6; 9:4). Deformed animals were
allowable in freewill offerings (Lev. 22:23). There is no mention of
pigeons beings used. These sacrifices were always accompanied by a meat
and drink offering.

In the ritual, the offeror led the animal to the altar, laid his hand
upon its head, and killed it. The fat parts were taken from the animal
and burned on the altar, on the burnt offering (Lev. 3:3–16; 9:18ff).
Thus, the peace offering presupposed the previous reconciliation of the
offeror with God and the holiness of his life as a basis of admission to
fellowship with God.

The breast and right shoulder were then separated from each other, the
shoulder being laid aside as the portion for the officiating priest. The
breast was “waved”, that is, raised in symbolic presentation to the
Lord, and was given to the priests to be eaten either boiled or roasted
in some clean place (Lev. 7:30ff; 10:13ff). The rest of the meat
belonged to the offeror, furnishing food for the sacrificial feast for
himself and his family. In the case of the thank offering, it must be
eaten the same day; in other cases it could have been eaten on the
second day, but no later. Whatever was not eaten had to be burned, but
not on the altar (Lev. 7:15–17; 22:30).

As the offeror and his family ate the material food of the peace
offering, it was a symbol of their being spiritual fed with the mercies
of God, of being satisfied with fullness of joy in the presence of the
Lord (Psa. 16:11). This was a feast of love and joy, symbolizing the
privilege of dwelling in the house and family of the Lord, and so
pictured the joy of His people before him (Deut. 12:12,18; Luke 14:15;
22:30).

###### Typology of the Peace Offering

As a sweet savor offering, the peace offering shows Christ as our peace.
Jesus Christ made peace, He proclaims peace, and He is our peace (Col.
1:20; Eph. 2:14-18). The offering sets forth God as propitiated and the
believer as reconciled - God and the sinner brought together in peace,
both satisfied with the finished work of Christ.

##### Meal and Drink Offerings

The meal and drink (libation) offerings recognized the sovereignty of
God and His goodness in providing earthly blessings; thus the best gifts
were dedicated to Him, such as flour, as the main support of life; oil,
the symbol of richness; wine, as the symbol of vigor and refreshment
(see Psa. 104:15). The idea seems to be expressed by David in 1 Chron.
29:10–14, “All that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine…All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.”

The material of the meal offering was sometimes grain, offered partly
unground and partly in refined flour, in both cases with oil poured on
and incense added. At other times cakes were prepared, in three
different ways (see above), with oil, but without leaven. Both kinds of
meal offering were to be seasoned with salt (Lev. 2:13). The drink
offering was always wine.

Meal offerings were either public or private, and were either brought in
connection with burnt or peace offerings or by themselves. They were
never offered with sin or trespass offerings. The established public
occasions for the meal offering were; (1) the presentation of the twelve
loaves of showbread for the Holy Place, (2) the omer, or sheaf of wheat
presented on the second day of Passover, and (3) the two wave loaves at
Pentecost. Four private meal offerings were prescribed by law:

1. The daily meal offering of the high priest, according to the Jewish
interpretation of Lev. 6:14ff

2. A meal offering at the consecration of priests (Lev. 6:20)

3. A meal offering in substitution for an animal at the sin offering, in
case of poverty (Lev. 5:11,12), and

4. A meal offering in the case of a husband’s jealousy of his adulterous
wife (Num. 5:11–15ff).

In all of the baked meal offerings, an “omer”, or sheaf of grain, was
made into ten cakes, except for the high priests’ meal offering of
twelve loaves, representing the twelve tribes of Israel. In presenting
the meal offering, the priest brought it in the gold or silver dish in
which it had been prepared, then transferred it to a holy vessel,
putting oil and frankincense on it. Standing at the south corner of the
altar, he took a “handful” that was to be burned, put it in another
vessel, laid some of the frankincense on it, carried it to the top of
the altar, salted it, and placed in on the fire. The rest of the
offering belonged to the priests, except in the case of the twelve
loaves of showbread and loaves offered at the consecration of priests,
which could not be eaten but were entirely burned (Lev. 6:16ff;
6:20-23).

There is no regulation given as to how the wine was presented or how it
was disposed of!

###### Typology of the Meal Offering

This offering typifies Christ in His human perfection tested by
suffering. The fine flour represented His sinless humanity. The fire is
the testing by suffering, even unto death. The frankincense symbolizes
the aroma of His life toward the Father (Exo. 30:34). The absence of
leaven, a type of evil, shows forth His spotless character. The oil
mingled with the offering speaks of his conception by the Holy Spirit
(Matt. 1:18–23). Oil poured on the offering speaks of his enduement with
the Spirit (John 1:32; 6:27).

##### Heave and Wave Offerings

Some of the offerings are called “heave” or “wave” offerings because of
the special manner in which they were presented. Those portions of the
offerings which were “heaved”, or lifted up, were regarded as gifts to
God, and were understood to be handed over to the priests to be used
only by them and their families (Num. 18:19; Lev. 22:10).

The wave offering was placed upon the outstretched hands of the offeror,
and the priest put his hands under those of the offeror. Then the priest
moved the whole backward and forward in a horizontal movement. The
following offerings were to be waved before the Lord:

- The breast of a private thank offering (Lev. 7:30)
- The fat, breast, and shoulder of the thank offerings at the
  consecration of the priests (Exo. 29:22–26; Lev. 8:25–29)
- The first sheaf offered on the second day of Passover (Lev. 23:11)
- The two lambs as a thank offering at the Feast of Pentecost (Lev.
  23:20)
- The lamb and oil as a trespass offering for the purification of the
  leper (Lev. 14:12)
- The thank offering of the Nazarite (Num. 6:20), and
- The jealousy offering (Num. 5:25)

##### The Red Heifer Offering

When a person became ceremonially unclean by some contact with an
unclean animal or person or by contact with a dead person, he was
required to go through a ritual cleansing. The material for this
purification was composed of running water and the ashes of the “red
heifer” (Num. 19:1ff).

The ashes were prepared as follows:

A heifer, without blemish, and which had never been yoked, was
slaughtered outside the camp.

The son and successor of the high priest dipped his finger in the blood
and sprinkled it seven times toward the sanctuary.

The heifer was burned in the presence of the priest, who, at the same
time, took the cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet wood, and cast them into
the flames.

A man who was free from defilement gathered the ashes and carried them
to a clean place, still outside the camp, where they were stored for use
as needed. All persons who were involved with this ceremony were
considered unclean until that evening.

###### The Procedure

When someone needed to have the purification rite performed on him, a
man, who was himself free from defilement, took some of the ashes, put
them in a vessel, and poured some fresh running water over them.

He dipped a bunch of hyssop into the mixture and sprinkled it upon the
person to be purified, once three days after the uncleanness had been
contracted, and again seven days after.

At the same time, the tent in which a corpse had lain and all the
furniture were sprinkled with the same water.

### Typology of the Red Heifer Offering

The red heifer offering is called a sin offering (Num. 19:9,17), and it
portrays the sacrifice of Christ as the medium of the believer’s
cleansing from the pollution contracted by his contact with the world.

The order of cleansing is:

1. The slaying of the sacrifice

2. The sevenfold sprinkling of the blood, showing the completed putting
away of the believers sins before God (Heb. 9:12–14).

3. The burning of the sacrifice to ashes and their preservation as a
memorial of the sacrifice

4. The cleansing by sprinkling with ashes mixed with water, typical of
the Holy Spirit and the Word of God (John 7:37–39; Eph. 5:26).

The whole ritual shows the fact that the Holy Spirit used the Word of
God to convict the believer of sin, thus making the believer conscious
that the guilt of sin was to be borne by Christ in His sacrifice.
Instead of losing hope, the convicted believer confesses the unworthy
act and is forgiven and cleansed (John 13:3–10; 1 John 1:7–10).

##### The Yearly Schedule of Sacrifices

References for the following are taken from Exo. 12, Lev. 16 and 23, and
Num. 28 and 29

###### Daily Offerings

The daily sacrifice, offered morning and evening:

- One yearling lamb, for a burnt offering
- A portion of flour, for a meal offering
- 1 1/4 pints of wine, for a drink offering

###### Sabbath Day Offerings

On the Sabbath, the daily offerings were made, plus the following:

- Two yearling lambs
- Two portions of flour mingled with oil
- 2 1/2 pints of wine
- Twelve fresh loaves of showbread

##### New Moon Offerings

On the occasion of the new moon, the regular daily offerings were made,
plus:

- Two young bullocks, one ram, and seven lambs, for burnt offerings
- Flour mingled with oil, three portions for each bullock, two portions
  for the ram, and one portion for each lamb
- A drink offering

###### Feast of Trumpets (or seventh New Moon)

The daily and new moon offerings were made, plus:

- One bullock, one ram, seven yearling lambs, for burnt offerings
- Flour mingled with oil; three portions for the bullock, two portions
  for the ram, one portion for each lamb
- One kid of goats, for a sin offering
- Drink offerings

###### Feast of Passover

On Passover the daily offerings were made. In addition a kid (lamb or
goat) was selected, on the 10th of the month Abib, and slain on the
14th, its blood being sprinkled on the doorposts and lintels.

### Feast of Unleavened Bread

The daily offerings were made on each day of the feast, held from the
15th to the 21st of Abib (following Passover), plus, daily:

- One goat for a sin offering
- Two young bullocks, one ram, and seven yearling lambs, for a burnt
  offering
- Flour mingled with oil, distributed as in the new moon offering

In addition, on the 2nd day of the feast, the first sheaf of the new
harvest (barley) was offered by waving, not burning. With this sheaf was
offered a male yearling lamb, two measures of flour, and 2 1/2 pints of
wine.

###### Pentecost (Feast of Weeks)

The daily offerings were made, plus the following on each day of
Pentecost:

- A kid of goats for a sin offering
- Two young bullocks, one ram, seven yearling lambs, for burnt offerings
- Flour and oil to accompany each burnt offering
- A drink offering for the ram and for each lamb.
- After the above was presented, the new meal offering, “two wave
loaves”, baked with leaven, were offered. With these were offered seven
yearling lambs, one young bullock, and two rams (burnt offering); a
he-goat (sin offering); and two yearling lambs (peace offering).

###### The Day of Atonement

On the Day of Atonement the regular daily offerings were made, plus:

- A bullock for a sin offering for the priesthood
- A ram for a burnt offering for the priesthood
- Two goats for a sin offering for the people
- A ram for a burnt offering for the people
- One young bullock, one ram, seven lambs, with accompanying meal and
drink offerings

###### The Feast of Tabernacles

The Feast of Tabernacles lasted eight days and there were different
combinations of offerings made on each of those days. There were a total
of 71 bullocks, 15 rams, 105 lambs, and 8 goats offered during the
feast, with accompanying meal and drink offerings.


Sources for this study:

Edersheim, *The Temple*

Edersheim, *History of the Old Testament*

Unger, Bible Dictionary

